The Nobel Prize in Physics is a yearly award given by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for those who have made
the most outstanding contributions for humankind in the field of physics. It is one of the five Nobel Prizes established by the
will of Alfred Nobel in 1895 and awarded since 1901, the others being the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Nobel Prize in Literature, Nobel Peace
Prize, and Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Physics is traditionally the first award presented in the Nobel Prize ceremony.

The prize consists of a medal along with a diploma and a certificate for the monetary award. The front side of the medal displays the same profile
of Alfred Nobel depicted on the medals for Physics, Chemistry, and Literature.

The first Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen in recognition of the extraordinary services he rendered by
the discovery of X-rays. This award is administered by the Nobel Foundation and is widely regarded as the most prestigious award that a
scientist can receive in physics. It is presented in Stockholm at an annual ceremony on the 10th of December, the anniversary of Nobel's death.
As of 2023, a total of 224 individuals have been awarded the prize.

Alfred Nobel, in his last will and testament, stated that his wealth should be used to create a series of prizes for those who confer the "greatest
benefit on mankind" in the fields of physics, chemistry, peace, physiology or medicine, and literature. Though Nobel wrote several wills during his
lifetime, the last one was written a year before he died and was signed at the Swedish-Norwegian Club in Paris on 27 November 1895. Nobel bequeathed
94% of his total assets, 31 million Swedish kronor ($2.9 million USD, or €2.7 million in 2023), to establish and endow the five Nobel Prizes. Owing
to the level of skepticism surrounding the will, it was not until 26 April 1897 that it was approved by the Storting (Norwegian Parliament). The
executors of his will were Ragnar Sohlman and Rudolf Lilljequist, who formed the Nobel Foundation to take care of Nobel's fortune and organise the
prizes.

The members of the Norwegian Nobel Committee who were to award the Peace Prize were appointed shortly after the will was approved. The other
prize-awarding organisations followed: the Karolinska Institutet on 7 June, the Swedish Academy on 9 June, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences
on 11 June. The Nobel Foundation then established guidelines for awarding the prizes. In 1900, the Nobel Foundation's newly created statutes were
promulgated by King Oscar II. According to Nobel's will, The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences would award the Prize in Physics.