A watercraft or waterborne vessel is any vehicle designed for travel across or through water bodies, such as a boat, ship, hovercraft, submersible or submarine.

Watercraft can be grouped into surface vessels, which include ships, yachts, boats, hydroplanes, wingships, unmanned surface vehicles, sailboards and human-powered craft such
as rafts, canoes, kayaks and paddleboards; underwater vessels, which include submarines, submersibles, unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs), wet subs and diver propulsion 
vehicles; and amphibious vehicles, which include hovercraft, car boats, amphibious ATVs and seaplanes. Many of these watercraft have a variety of subcategories and are used 
for different needs and applications.

The design of watercraft requires a tradeoff among internal capacity (tonnage), speed and seaworthiness. Tonnage is important for transport of goods, speed is important for 
warships and racing vessels, and the degree of seaworthiness varies according to the bodies of water on which a watercraft is used. Regulations apply to larger watercraft, 
to avoid foundering at sea and other problems. Design technologies include the use of computer modeling and ship model basin testing before construction.

Watercraft propulsion can be divided into five categories:
1) Water power is used by drifting with a river current or a tidal stream. An anchor or weight may be lowered to provide enough steerage way to keep in the best part of the 
current (as in drudging) or paddles or poles might be used to keep position.
2) Human effort is used through a pole pushing against the bottom of shallow water, or paddles or oars operating in the surface of the water.
3) Wind power is used by sails
4) Towing is used, either from the land, such as the bank of a canal, with the motive power provided by draught animals, humans or machinery, or one watercraft may tow another.
5) Mechanical propulsion uses a motor whose power is derived from burning a fuel or stored energy such as batteries. This power is commonly converted into propulsion by 
propellers or by water jets, with paddle wheels being a largely historical method.